dark energy some mystery repulsive
anti-gravity force that must exist in
the universe that will drive the
universe to get ever faster in its
expansion they estimated how much of
this dark energy forcing the universe
apart there might be it's a staggering
amount works out at sixty eight point
three percent of the energy budget of
the universe is dark energy the rest is
physical matter mass but of the rest of
it only the orange sector is the stuff
that we are made of and they're
everything we can see is made of the
other 26.8% is this other weird stuff
called dark matter and I have a talk
about that again there's a video on
YouTube called from the pendulum to dark
matter if you want an explanation of
dark matter we're going to ignore that
for now but you can see that dark energy
is by far the dominant form of energy in
the whole universe
and so this was a shock and a huge
surprise to everyone but the real
question is what is it what is this dark
energy and to try and understand that we
have to have a little look at a little
bit of quantum mechanic weirdness this
is the fact that empty space but really
empty empty space thieves with
short-lived pairs of particles and
antimatter particles may borrow energy
from space-time
pop into existence and then Rhian aisle
eight again and pay back the energy that
they borrowed from space-time so the
question is
could this be
the energy of empty space could this be
the explanation for dark energy well if
it sounds pretty weird this quantum
vacuum effect is real it's been measured
as the Casimir effect and an experiments
predicted in 1948 and experiments been
done if you hang two metal plates in a
vacuum you get a pressure between them
caused by this vacuum energy the energy
of empty space being different between
the plates to the amount outside of the
plates for weird and complicated reasons
to do with that what wavelengths of
radiation can fit between the plates
neatly but it's a real effect and it's
been measured and we have to take it
into account in some everyday physics as
well these days so now this was as I say
predicted and could be well if you're
looking for something that causes a an
outward pressure on empty space this
could be a candidate but when we
calculate at the amount of vacuum energy
and try and make it fit with dark energy
because it all sounds fine until you do
the maths what we found was that the
pressure from vacuum point energy came
out to be too large to account for dark
energy by a factor of ten with a hundred
and twenty zeros after it and that's
been described as the worst estimate
ever in the history of all science and I
think it's an example of quantum
mechanics and general relativity don't
like each other very much so it might
still be the explanation it's just that
we might not be getting our maths
correct for this one
so how much energy is there I said it
was 68% of the total energy budget of
the universe well we know from the
measurements of the expansion that it's
about the equivalent if you talk about
it in terms of mass you can convert
energy to mass via equals MC squared
that famous equation and roughly it's
the same as having 10 to the minus 27
kilograms per cubic meter and the rest
of the proton is about 1.6 7 times 10 to
the minus 27 kilograms so it's about the
same as having one proton in every cubic
meter of the universe that's tiny
because even the gas between the stars
which is a better vacuum than we can
make in any vacuum chamber on earth has
a million protons in every cubic meter
and so unfortunately this means it's
going to be very very difficult for us
to actually try to measure dark energy
in the laboratory because if we did
manage to make a vacuum that was a
million times better than we managed
today we still be several million times
short of being able to actually measure
this one remaining proton but
nevertheless because this dark energy is
everywhere across all of space it still
manages to taut up to that 68% of all
the energy budget of the universe
okay so now the weird thing that we've
noticed and this is a little bit
suspicious I think it seems that the
acceleration has only started very
recently when the universe was smaller
and all the mass was closer together
gravity would have had a stronger grip
and there was less space and so there
was less dark energy as you as the
universe creates more space as space
expands the amount of dark energy
increases and the mass is carried
further apart
and so it's mutual gravity decreases and
it looks like the dark energy is going
to win eventually for that reason
and so what it appears is that as the
expansion continued gravity looks to
have lost the battle with dark energy
well round about now actually we seem to
be at the inflection point
the destiny of the universe looks like
its ultimate fate is this ever
quickening expansion of everything
that's not already densely packed enough
for gravity to win and so that means
that the Milky Way is fine the Milky Way
and the Andromeda galaxy and our friends
in the Triangulum galaxy they're all
fine they're gravitationally bound
together and dense enough that dark
energy won't win because they the gravit
galaxies will move together and merge
and become denser faster than dark
energy ever manages to expand but the
rest of the universe will disappear ever
more quickly outside our visible horizon
beyond the point where light can travel
from it to us and be carried away from
us faster than the speed of light so
sadly all of everything that's outside
our local Group of galaxies is destined
to disappear according to this we're
still if you run things further forward
the big rip will occur dark energy will
eventually become so enormous that it
will unbind the galaxy and bind all the
stars from the galaxy in the Milky Way
will fall apart and they'll all then
disappear from each other and then it
will unbind the planets from the Sun and
then eventually it'll unbind the
electrons from the atoms and tear
absolutely everything apart and this is
called the big rip it's one possible
destiny of the whole of the cosmos to be
torn apart now actually as a modern
theory by Roger Penrose about this that
this is a good thing and that once it's
happened and all of the matter particles
have been torn apart all you're left
with is radiation in an empty universe
and his theory of conformal cyclic
cosmology as it's called says that that
will lead to a new
big bang that's a whole other topic so
the question is is this right and could
the universe be fooling us
well since the announcement of the Nobel
Prize and the theory of dark energy one
or two things have started to crop up a
supernova study discovered this
particular one here SN LS 0 3 D 3 BB in
a galaxy far far away 4 billion light
years away and it appeared to go bang
with too much mass 2 solar masses more
than the 1.44 of their Chandrasekhar
limit well perhaps that particular one
isn't a super Chandrasekhar event that's
breaking the rules because perhaps it
was two white dwarfs colliding with each
other each starting with less than the
Chandrasekhar limit but combining to
produce one that was too much oh that's
ok but then there was this one in 2009
and here the light curve marked at the
top there with the little blob all on
its own on the diagram the little black
dot doesn't fit with the light curve of
a typical Chandrasekhar event a typical
type 1a supernova it appears that it was
way too bright and the latest news as
off December 2019 Cornell University
produced a paper about events like that
showing that some supernovae some type
1a supernovae vary I mean the properties
of them depend on certain properties of
the host galaxy and in particular they
depend on what they call the metallicity
of the original star that went into form
the white dwarf
now this metallicity is really a measure
of how many heavy elements there are in
the mix how much there is that's not the
hydrogen and the helium from the Big
Bang and therefore whether it's a second
or a third or a fourth generation of
stars that have got all the pollutants
the carbon the nickel the iron and the
heavy elements that get made
in the death of stars now that means
that there's a bias between older
supernovae that couldn't have been
formed out of anything except hydrogen
and helium out of first generation stars
and much more recent ones and that's
what this church chart over here with
the curved lines is trying to show that
there's a bias in it which breaks the
standard candle model of type 1a
supernovae and what the worst possible
thing is it breaks it over time so it
means that the relationship changes
between the distant universe and the
modern universe and it may well be that
it changes in just the way to account
for the curving of the track implies a
shift to a trick you into thinking
you've got dark energy when in fact you
haven't so that could be quite exciting
news and there's further new news from
the group in Oxford Paris and Copenhagen
collaborating they looked at a large
sample of type 1a supernovae now the
original study used something like sixty
supernovae and got them from two groups
they Heisey the distant ones they very
large redshift ones and another survey
and that's why that original chart that
I show there as some marked in red from
the high Z project and some from the
super Cosmo
supernova cosmology project marked in
orange that were to some extent but some
of them were nearby but not only the
were they at different distances they
were actually in different directions on
the sky and the new study has looked at
740 of these exploding white dwarfs and
shown that when you look at it we
perceived dark energy acceleration is
aligned in one direction and if you look
at right angles to that direction at the
super novae that are off that axis you
don't see the acceleration effect at all
and that that dark energy alignment that
acceleration vector that's shown in blue
on the top charts marked on top of the
smooth cosmic microwave background
radiation appears to point in a
direction where there's an asymmetry and
where the solar system is moving in that
direction anyway and that gives that red
blue Doppler shift to the cosmic
microwaves so it could be that the
entire dark energy measurement was an
artifact of the fact that the supernovae
they were looking at just happened to be
aligned fore and aft relative to our
direction of motion and so the universe
could be confusing us and is another
Third Way which we could be confusing us
if our region of space our local Group
of galaxies is a bit light and a bit
under dense and that could distort our
view and yet another idea has come up
which may be is that the universe is
actually ringing like a bell in its
expansion and oscillating now that's
based on trying to extrapolate the data
perhaps a little bit too far but overall
I am becoming very suspicious that this
dark energy might not be quite as solid
a piece of science as maybe the Nobel
Committee thought it was and well I
don't think they asked for the Nobel
Prizes back but we just gotta wait and
see let's see how this latest round of
evidence pans out so I think the answer
to what is the destiny of the universe
is frankly we just don't know at this
point
so